JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
The United States will withdraw
from the Paris
climate accord.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Breaking from
nearly all nations
in the world, President Trump
abandons the
landmark agreement aimed at
combating climate
change.
Then: the latest unraveling in
the Russia
investigation.
Vladimir Putin admits that
Russian hackers
may have acted independently to
influence
the U.S. presidential election.
And how urban revival is meeting
a crisis
of success -- a look at why
cities are being
dragged down by class divides.
RICHARD FLORIDA, Author, "The
New Urban Crisis":
If the old urban crisis was
about the middle-class
flight from the city to the
suburbs, the new
urban crisis is about really the
disappearance
of middle-class neighborhoods
from our society.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: From President
Trump today,
a declaration: The United States
wants out
of the Paris accord on climate
change, and
wants to negotiate better terms.
Under the existing agreement,
the U.S. must
cut carbon emissions 26 to 28
percent from
2005 levels by the year 2025.
But in the White House Rose
Garden, Mr. Trump
said the deal gives other
countries an economic
edge and makes America foot the
bill.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States:
As president, I can put no other
consideration
before the well-being of
American citizens.
The Paris climate accord is
simply the latest
example of Washington entering
into an agreement
that disadvantages the United
States, to the
exclusive benefit of other
countries, leaving
American workers, who I love,
and taxpayers
to absorb the cost in terms of
lost jobs,
lower wages, shuttered factories
and vastly
diminished economic production.
Thus, as of today, the United
States will
cease all implementation of the
nonbinding
Paris accord and the draconian
financial and
economic burdens the agreement
imposes on
our country.
At what point does America get
demeaned?
At what point do they start
laughing at us
as a country?
We want fair treatment for its
citizens and
we want fair treatment for our
taxpayers.
We don't want other leaders and
other countries
laughing at us anymore, and they
won't be.
They won't be.
I was elected to represent the
citizens of
Pittsburgh, not Paris.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Former President
Obama said
today that Mr. Trump is joining
the handful
of nations that reject the
future.
Meanwhile, European leaders
voiced regret,
and said the accord cannot be
renegotiated.
China, the world's largest
carbon emitter
right now, reaffirmed its
commitment to the
deal.
And we will hear from both sides
of the issue
after the news summary.
In the day's other news,
President Trump decided
against moving the U.S. Embassy
in Israel
from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem, at
least for now.
He'd campaigned on a promise to
do just that,
but the White House said that
waiting might
improve chances of peace between
Israel and
the Palestinians.
At least 14 Trump White House
officials have
been granted waivers from ethics
rules.
Their names were posted last
night, under
pressure from the Office of
Government Ethics.
The officials include, among
others, Michael
Catanzaro, a former oil and gas
lobbyist who's
now a senior energy policy aide,
and Shahira
Knight.
She's a former lobbyist for
Fidelity Investments,
now working on tax reform.
In Russia, President Vladimir
Putin acknowledged
today that what he called
patriotic Russian
individuals may have launched
cyber-attacks
on the U.S., but he insisted
again that his
government had no role in
election meddling.
Instead, speaking to
international journalists,
he blamed Russophobic hysteria
and perhaps
a smear campaign.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through
translator): I can imagine the
situation where
somebody purposely does the
attacks in a way
to make it look like the Russian
Federation
is the source of those attacks.
But what is most important, I'm
deeply convinced
that any hackers cannot
significantly influence
an election campaign in another
country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Putin also called
President
Trump -- quote -- "a
straightforward person,
a frank person with a fresh set
of eyes."
Afghans buried loved ones today
after Wednesday's
massive truck bombing in Kabul.
The blast killed at least 90
people.
Hundreds gathered today for the
funeral of
a security guard.
The bombing was one of the worst
attacks since
the 2014 drawdown of foreign
forces in Afghanistan.
A gunman caused a scare today at
a resort
complex in the capital of the
Philippines.
Reports of gunshots touched off
panic.
And, in Washington, President
Trump called
it a terrorist attack.
A short time later, Manila
police announced
that it wasn't terrorism, and
that no one
was hurt.
He said gunman fired into the
air, stole gambling
chips and set fire to gaming
tables.
The upcoming election in Britain
is turning
into a free-for-all.
With the vote just a week away,
a new survey
shows that the ruling
Conservatives are ahead
of Labor by just three points.
That's down sharply since last
week's bombing
in Manchester.
Prime Minister Theresa May
called the snap
election in order to bolster her
government
as it negotiates Britain's exit
from the European
Union.
Wall Street pushed higher today
on signs that
businesses added more jobs in
May.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 135
points to close at 21144.
The Nasdaq rose 48, and the S&P
500 added
18.
All three were record closes.
And the NBA finals start
tonight, with the
much-anticipated rematch between
the Golden
State Warriors and the Cleveland
Cavaliers,
the reigning champions.
But it's been partly
overshadowed by a racial
slur spray-painted outside the
Los Angeles
home of LeBron James.
The Cleveland star said
Wednesday that it
shows racism is very much alive.
LEBRON JAMES, Cleveland
Cavaliers: No matter
how much money you got, no
matter how famous
you are, no matter how many
people admire
you, at the end of the day,
being a black
man in America is very
frightening.
And it lets us know that we have
got so much
farther, so much farther to go
to be equal
in this country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Police are
investigating the
vandalism as a possible hate
crime.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
California's
governor and Utah's junior
senator weigh in
on the Paris climate agreement;
the head of
the U.N. Refugee Agency on the
United States'
responsibility to help migrants
around the
world; as cities grow,
inequality follows,
addressing what one author calls
the new urban
crisis; and much more.
addressing what one author calls
the new urban
crisis; and much more.
We zero in now on the big story
of this day,
the president's decision to
withdraw from
a global accord aimed at slowing
the impact
of climate change.
We explore the consequences of
all this, and
how it may play out in coming
years in the
United States and around the
world.
We begin with California
Governor Jerry Brown,
a Democrat.
His state is battling efforts by
the Trump
administration to roll back some
emissions
regulations.
And he's flying to China
tomorrow to discuss
what more can be done on climate
change.
I spoke with him just a short
time ago.
Governor Jerry Brown, thank you
for joining
us.
Your office put out a statement
a short time
ago saying, this is an insane
course of action.
Do you mean that?
GOV.
JERRY BROWN (D), California: I
certainly do
mean that.
If anything, it's understated.
Climate change is an existential
threat to
all of humanity, to the natural
systems on
which all life depends.
Not tomorrow, but starting very
quickly, we're
seeing changes.
California has lost 100 million
trees from
the drought.
Sea level is rising.
the Antarctica is seeing ice
melting at an
ever rapid rate, some say in an
irreversible
way.
This is a profoundly serious
problem.
The Paris agreement was an
agreement of nations
saying what they could do
voluntarily.
Here's the commitment.
President Obama made something I
thought was
doable, was reasonable.
In fact, California is doing
that very thing
now, and our economy has grown
in terms of
GDP 40 percent faster than the
nation as a
whole.
We have created over two million
jobs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes.
GOV.
JERRY BROWN: So, climate action
and jobs go
together.
So, that's why I say this move
by Trump makes
no sense, and it's going to hurt
America,
and it's going to cost jobs, not
the reverse.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, as you
know, he makes
a different argument.
He says this -- he said, I'm in
favor of doing
something to help the
environment, but he
said this accord is going to
cost millions
of jobs and cost the American
people trillions
in lost economic output.
GOV.
JERRY BROWN: That's just --
that's a lie.
That's completely unwarranted.
Yes, jobs are always declining
all the time,
the creative destruction of
capitalism.
But jobs are being created.
California has lost jobs, but,
net, we have
added 2.4 million jobs in the
last eight years,
since the recession.
That is a remarkable outcome,
and it's consistent,
in fact, I would say driven by
the clean tech
investments and the climate
action strategies
that we have embarked upon.
So, President Trump is
completely wrong.
He's doing this for his own
base, highly ideological.
He's wrong on the science.
He's wrong on the facts.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, he also --
another argument
he makes, Governor, he says,
this puts restrictions
on the United States, while the
United States
is reducing its emissions, while
it lets other
countries like China, that
continue to pollute
more and more, get away with
doing that for
years to come with no penalties.
GOV.
JERRY BROWN: He really distorts
the record.
He has a record of that, and
he's doing it
again.
China is exceeding its
commitment, and it's
turning a big machine around, to
the point
where it's stopping the growth
of emissions
in a few years.
And it's the leader in wind and
solar power.
And, yes, they're building some
coal pants.
They have to go faster.
They're not perfect.
But this is an agreement of the
willing that
have said in Paris, here's what
we will do.
And it's reasonable, what China
is doing,
reasonable, what America is
doing.
In fact, I would say both have
to do a lot
more.
So, Trump is taking this in the
exact wrong
direction, which will cost us
more money.
When the New York, the subway is
underwater,
or New Orleans or President
Trump's hotel
down there in Florida are
devastated by rising
sea levels, that will cost
hundreds of billions.
Aggregate, over decades, we're
talking trillions.
So, the economics is all to the
opposite of
what President Trump is saying.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Governor, among
other things,
as you know, the president is
talking to his
base, people who voted for him.
There's an indication they're
going to like
what he did today.
Has your side of this argument
missed an opportunity
to explain to the American
people how protecting
the environment can also be good
for the economy?
GOV.
JERRY BROWN: Well, I don't think
that message
is clear enough.
And certainly people can be more
articulate.
California, obviously, it's
clear.
Orange County for the first time
in decades
voted against a Republican, Mr.
Trump.
And I think part of that is our
environmental
policies working, as well as our
job creation
running at full speed.
So, yes, this is a message that
has to be
made more persuasively, more
simply, and made
more extensively across the
country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You mentioned
California, and
I think you said in your
statement today California
can continue to cut its own
deals with other
countries, continue to move
forward with technology.
How does that work?
I mean, the president said he's
willing to
renegotiate the Paris accord.
Is that realistic at the same
time you're
talking about California and
other states
going forward on their own?
GOV.
JERRY BROWN: Already, European
nations have
said Paris is not negotiable.
The president of France said
that and others.
What's he going to renegotiate?
This is a modest commitment on
the part of
President Obama.
And we have to do more, not
less.
I'm going to China tomorrow.
I will meet with high officials.
We will agree on standardizing
various clean
technologies that will make it
possible to
invest and produce even more.
We're going to work, California
and China.
We're working with New York and
Washington.
Canada and Mexico have joined
with over 170
states, provinces and nations
committed to
this Paris agreement.
So, the world is not waiting for
Donald Trump.
He has given a body blow to the
cause of environmental
sustainability, but we will take
it and we
will respond.
We're on the field of battle,
and we're going
to overcome.
That, I can promise you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Governor Jerry
Brown of California,
thank you very much.
GOV.
JERRY BROWN: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now for an
opposing view, we
turn to Senator Mike Lee of
Utah.
He was one of 22 Republican
senators who signed
a letter to President Trump last
week urging
him to withdraw from the Paris
agreement.
Senator Lee, welcome to the
program.
I believe you just heard the
response of California
Governor Jerry Brown, who argues
this is a
fundamentally wrong decision.
He said it's going to set back
the cause of
fighting climate change.
SEN.
MIKE LEE (R), Utah: Yes, I think
he's wrong.
I think I disagree with every
word, every
syllable he uttered, including
the words but
and the.
Look, this was a right decision.
This was the right thing to do.
When President Obama entered
into this agreement
a couple years ago, he didn't
submit it to
the United States Senate for
ratification
as a treaty.
He didn't do that because he
knew there was
absolutely no way he could get
the two-thirds
supermajority vote necessary in
order to get
this ratified, in order to make
it the law
of the land as a governing
treaty.
He didn't do that.
And, consequently, it was
entirely foreseeable
that when a different president
from a different
party with a different point of
view came
along, he wouldn't move forward
with it.
President Trump did that today
because he
decided this wasn't in the
interest of the
United States of America.
He did the right thing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator, one of
the arguments
that we heard Governor Brown and
others making
today is that President Trump
and those who
are pushing this decision today
don't understand
the way the climate and jobs,
the economy
interact, that, in fact, when
you do less
to fight climate change, as this
-- as what
the president, in effect, is
doing, he's missing
a chance for the United States
to move ahead
with clean energy technology,
so, in other
words, that what he's done is
going to cost
jobs, rather than increase them.
SEN.
MIKE LEE: You know, I would flip
it on them.
I would point out, quite to the
contrary,
what has brought down emissions
both from
stationary sources like power
plants and from
mobile sources like automobiles
is innovation,
improvements in technology that
have occurred
as a result of free market
forces, and in
the absence, I would add, of
anything like
a treaty comparing to the Paris
agreement.
So, this has happened through
innovation,
through free market forces.
I think quite the opposite of
what Governor
Brown was saying, that when the
government
gets involved, it tends to
squelch innovation.
And that innovation is needed
for us to control
emissions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me quote
something that
your predecessor, the former EPA
administrator,
Gina -- not your predecessor --
I'm sorry
-- the former EPA administrator,
Gina McCarthy,
said today.
She said: "This is an
embarrassing day for
the United States."
She went on to say: "Make no
mistake.
Because of this reckless
decision, our businesses
will lose investment
opportunities.
We will cede technology
breakthroughs to countries
that will take over our
leadership role, and
the rest of the world will
question whether
the U.S. can be trusted."
SEN.
MIKE LEE: Yes, that's pretty
apocalyptic.
And I think that's apocalyptic
to the point
of straining credulity.
But, look, these are smart
people, but they
are not omniscient.
And I think their prophesies of
doom and gloom
are entirely unwarranted.
And, in fact, I think they're
inappropriate.
Again, we have to get back to
the fact that
this power, the power to enter
into binding
international agreements, this
is a shared
power.
This is something that was
decided, should
be a shared power, at the
Constitutional Convention
some 230 years ago.
As I explain in my new book that
came out
this week called "Written Out Of
History,"
these powers that are vested in
the federal
government have to be clearly
enumerated.
They have to be limited.
And we can't give excessive,
unfettered power
to a president to act alone, to
bind an entire
country to a set of principles,
a set of rules
that the president, him or
herself, makes.
That's what we would be allowing
presidents
to do if we said any time a
president, like
President Obama, wants to
subject an entire
country to a new set of rules,
that president
can do so without submitting
that international
agreement to the Senate for
treaty ratification.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Senator,
maybe this is
alone those lines, but I'm now
reading comments
even from some Republicans who
have a problem
with this decision.
A Republican congressman from
Florida, Carlos
Curbelo, was interviewed, I
heard, just within
the hour.
He is saying this is a mistake.
He said: I'm already seeing the
impact of
climate change on my part of the
state.
And we need to move forward with
technology
to address it.
And I want to quickly quote the
former Republican
Treasury Secretary Henry
Paulson, who said
he's dismayed and disappointed.
He said: "By moving ourselves to
the sidelines
of an evolving global
conversation," he said,
"we have left a void for others
to fill.
Regrettably, this undermines
U.S. credibility,
weakens our ability to lead in
other areas."
SEN.
MIKE LEE: Yes, look, I
completely disagree.
The fact that you can point to
some people
who call themselves Republicans
who disagree
with this decision doesn't
change this analysis.
And I notice there wasn't a
corresponding
pushback to the person who
preceded me.
You didn't push back like this
to Governor
Brown.
I understand that you might
disagree personally
with what the president did
today.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator --
Senator...
SEN.
MIKE LEE: But that doesn't make
it -- I'm
sorry.
I would like to answer your
question.
That doesn't mean that this was
wrong.
This was the right thing to do.
The president put people before
this Paris
agreement.
He put Pittsburgh before Paris.
He did the right thing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator, just to
set the record
straight, I quoted President
Trump several
times back to Governor Brown in
my interview
with him, just as I have quoted
some who criticized
the president's decision in my
interview with
you.
Finally, Senator, let me...
SEN.
MIKE LEE: Yes.
But I want to be clear.
The reason I made that point is,
you didn't
try to identify some Democrats
who might have
supported this.
You quoted the president
himself.
And what I'm saying is, you are
pushing back
on me in a way you didn't push
back on him.
That's fine.
That's your right to do that as
a reporter.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me
finally ask you,
Senator, the president said he's
open to renegotiation.
We're already hearing from
European officials
that it's -- that this is an
accord not open
for renegotiation.
So, how do you foresee moving
ahead in that
direction?
SEN.
MIKE LEE: Well, if they're
saying this is
not open for renegotiation, and
this negotiation
was itself something that
couldn't get through
the United States Senate, and
that's why President
Obama never submitted it to the
Senate for
treaty ratification, then we're
at an impasse,
and we will proceed.
We will proceed, by the way, I
should add,
as a global leader in
environmental regulation.
We are a global leader in the
rule of law.
We have brought down emissions
in this country
through our legal system and
through technological
innovation.
We can do this on our own.
We don't have to have the
permission of countries
all over the world to do that.
We have done it pretty well.
We have done it much better than
a lot of
our would-be partners in this
agreement.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator Mike Lee
of Utah, thank
you very much for talking with
us.
SEN.
MIKE LEE: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Brutal wars in
the Middle East,
Africa and Asia have forced the
world's populations
of refugees and displaced
persons to near
record highs.
Meanwhile, the Trump
administration has signaled
its intention to substantially
change U.S.
refugee policy.
Filippo Grandi, who is the
United Nations'
top official leading the
response to the refugee
crisis, is in Washington this
week for meetings
at the White House and Pentagon.
Our William Brangham sat down
with him earlier
this evening.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Hi,
Commissioner Filippo
Grandi.
Welcome.
FILIPPO GRANDI, United Nations
High Commissioner
for Refugees: Thank you.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: You're here in
Washington,
D.C., obviously this week to
meet with some
members of the Trump
administration.
I'm curious, what message are
you here to
convey to them?
FILIPPO GRANDI: A message that I
have already
conveyed in previous visits.
U.S. leadership in humanitarian
matters and
specifically in matters
concerning responses
to refugee crisis is very
important, continues
to be very important.
And the response I get is quite
good.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: What is that
response?
What do you hear back from them?
FILIPPO GRANDI: Well, I think we
all watched
Ambassador Haley, the U.S.
ambassador to United
Nations...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Nikki Haley,
yes.
FILIPPO GRANDI: ... visit
recently refugee
programs in Turkey and in
Georgia.
We're talking about Syrian
refugees, the biggest
refugee crisis in the world.
And her message was very clear
and very strong.
United States' generosity and
United States'
support for refugees continues
to be strong
and constant.
And I greatly appreciated this
message on
her part.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I know
Ambassador Haley
has said that on several
occasions.
But we have also seen President
Trump try
to pass through an executive
order that, in
effect, says, we're not taking
any refugees
in the U.S.
And the president has conflated
refugees with
the fear of terrorism, saying,
we can't know
who these people are.
Is this something that you bring
up with administration
officials?
Do you talk with them about
those concerns
that they have shared?
FILIPPO GRANDI: A great deal.
In fact, I don't think there was
ever any
statement saying that no more
refugees should
come to the United States.
There were decisions to increase
the vetting
of those selected to come here
and to limit
certain nationalities.
All this, as you know, is now
being discussed
in the judicial sphere.
So we have to wait for that
discussion, which
is an American, a U.S.
discussion to finish.
Our message is, resettlement
programs -- this
is what we're talking about --
are a very
important tool to protect the
most vulnerable
refugees.
And vetting is already quite
strong for those
refugees that enter that
program.
Of course, this is a sovereign
decision of
the United States, but I think
and I hope
that, after all this is done,
after conclusions
are made, that program will be
preserved.
I think it may be reduced to
previous higher
levels, but I hope that, with
the passage
of time and once these controls
-- once the
administration confident that
the controls
are there, will we continue to
see robust
resettlement to the United
States.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The reason I
ask about this
is, this is not just a concern
expressed by
President Trump, but even
Chancellor Angela
Merkel in Germany has seen a
good deal of
resistance to her very open
embrace of refugees.
There still is a very strong
fear, a conflation
of refugees with the fear of
terrorism.
And I'm just curious what you --
what do you
say to world leaders when they
express this,
that we don't have the political
appetite
to take refugees onto our
shores?
FILIPPO GRANDI: The fear of
insecurity is
a very understandable one,
especially in a
world in which terrorism has
created so much
damage and killed so many
people.
And we are, of course, with
states in saying
controls, checks, vetting have
to be carried
out in the most -- in the
strongest possible
way.
This is absolutely true.
But I also pass another message.
In fact, it's very rare, if
ever, that refuges
coming from situations of war,
of violence,
of violations of human rights
perpetrate crimes
of terrorism.
It is not they who do that.
It is other people.
In fact, those people do not
bring terror.
Refugees flee from terror.
I think it's very important not
to conflate
refugees and terrorists in this
sense.
It's very important to control,
it's very
important to check, but it's
also very important
to make that distinction, and
never forget
where these people come from.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Lastly, a
quick question
on funding.
I know this is obviously an
enormous challenge
for the U.N.
Do you have enough money to do
the work you
need to do?
FILIPPO GRANDI: Certainly not.
Our budget last year was
calculated at 7 billion
U.S. dollars, 2016.
We got billion U.S. dollars.
So about 55 percent of our needs
the covered.
This means that we do a lot of
prioritization.
And we prioritize, evidently.
With so many refugee crises,
with 65 million
refugees and displaced people
around the world,
we have to prioritize lifesaving
activities.
What suffers?
What suffers what is not
immediately vital
and necessary, but which is
equally important,
like education, livelihoods.
That's why we're looking at
other ways to
meet those needs with other
sources of funding,
because they're equally
important in the long
run to sustain assistance to
millions of refugees.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Filippo
Grandi, thank you
very much for being here.
FILIPPO GRANDI: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Coming up on the
"NewsHour":
new developments in the Russia
file -- Vladimir
Putin says some patriotic
Russians might have
tried to influence the U.S.
election; from
Russia to climate change, the
politics that
still divide the nation; and a
Brief But Spectacular
take from two people living with
Alzheimer's.
But first: the double-edged
sword of urban
revival.
Even as some cities are becoming
ever more
popular and desirable, they're
also becoming
places where the middle-class
and lower-income
residents are getting priced out
of the market.
Economics correspondent Paul
Solman has the
story.
It's part of his weekly series,
Making Sense.
PAUL SOLMAN: Looking down on
Manhattan's old
meatpacking district, the High
Line, a mecca
for more than seven million
eager tourists
a year, astride a once-derelict
spur of the
New York Central.
RICHARD FLORIDA, Author, "The
New Urban Crisis":
This was an old, broken-down,
abandoned rail
line, elevated rail line.
PAUL SOLMAN: A rail line
shrouding the buildings
beneath.
As a result, rents were cheap
and the cutting-edge
marginalized moved in.
RICHARD FLORIDA: Much of this
area of Chelsea
was historically a gay
neighborhood.
And they were gay men and wanted
to do something
which celebrated the history of
the old gay
neighborhood.
PAUL SOLMAN: Noted urbanologist
Richard Florida:
RICHARD FLORIDA: There's one of
the old buildings
still with the rainbow flag.
PAUL SOLMAN: A remnant of a past
that proved
a harbinger of gentrification to
come.
RICHARD FLORIDA: Once they built
the park,
it became a draw, not of people,
but for real
estate developers.
And they never anticipated that.
No one anticipated the High Line
would be
a place that luxury towers would
grow up around.
PAUL SOLMAN: But have they ever.
For nearly a mile-and-a-half,
the elevated
walkway now winds through towers
full of luxury
condos, over-the-top testimony
to the urban
revitalization that Florida
famously championed
in his 2002 book, "The Creative
Class."
RICHARD FLORIDA: We're going
through, I think,
one of the greatest economic
transformations
in history, from an old
industrially, corporate-based
vertical economy to a new
knowledge economy.
But the twist I try to add is,
it's also urban.
It's city-based.
It's clustered in cities.
PAUL SOLMAN: Florida's twist
became gospel.
Attract members of the creative
class, and
they, in turn, will create jobs,
which will,
in turn, renew and rebuild.
And it happened.
Just look at the High Line.
But what Florida now sees is the
double edge
of the advice he gave, and that
so many followed.
RICHARD FLORIDA: A bigger,
denser city in
general increases the rate of
innovation,
increases the rate of start-up,
increases
the rate of productivity.
At the same time, the bigger,
the denser,
the more knowledge-intensive
increases the
rate of inequality, increases
the rate of
economic segregation, makes
housing less affordable.
So it's a two-sided monster.
PAUL SOLMAN: Those unintended
consequences
of urban revival are the
real-world twist
Florida wrestles with in his
latest book,
"The New Urban Crisis."
RICHARD FLORIDA: People want to
park money
in real estate, artists, the
best art galleries
in the world, commercial
companies, real estate
development firms, financial
headquarters,
tech companies, start-ups and
companies like
Google.
So, the second dimension is, I
kind of call
it a crisis of success.
These places now become terribly
unaffordable
for anyone who's not either a
knowledge worker
or a techie or a member of the
super rich.
PAUL SOLMAN: As a result,
pressure on most
of the city's residents, now
facing apartment
rents and prices soaring as high
as the buildings
that house them, many actually
unoccupied,
because they're assets for
foreigners, parking
their money, as Florida puts it,
in real estate.
RICHARD FLORIDA: You used to
have stocks,
you used to have bonds.
Now owning real estate in a
superstar city
becomes another class of asset.
PAUL SOLMAN: Rents in this
building?
Roughly $3,500 a month for a
one-room studio
apartment, $4,700 for a
one-bedroom, $7,000
for two bedrooms.
SARA HOCHRAD, MD-BO /New York: I
could not
live in a decent Manhattan
apartment by myself.
I might be able to live in
Queens or maybe
outer skirts of Brooklyn these
days, because
it's gotten very expensive
there, too.
PAUL SOLMAN: Sara Hochrad, a
31-year-old speech
therapist who works nearby,
lives across town
with roommates, was hoping to
move somewhere
close with her boyfriend.
How much would you and he have
to earn, just
a guess, to be able to afford a
$4,700-a-month
apartment?
SARA HOCHRAD: Maybe $150,000,
$170,000.
Like, and that's to really cut
down into the
bare bones of what -- how you
live.
PAUL SOLMAN: At least $150,000 a
year.
It was testimony like this that
triggered
Florida's aha moment: the
gradual displacement
of all but the most successful
types he'd
long urged cities to attract.
RICHARD FLORIDA: We did an
analysis which
looked at the amount of money in
these three
groups, the knowledge creative
class, the
working blue-collar class, and
the service
workers, had left over after
paying for housing.
The creatives had like $80,000
or $90,000
left over.
The blue-collars had $30,000,
and the service
workers had like $15,000.
I realized that this urbanism,
winner-take-all
urbanism, it was benefiting one
group much
more disproportionately than the
other two.
PAUL SOLMAN: And, with
ballooning rents, low-income
workers are being squeezed out
entirely, banished
to the once-desirable suburbs.
RICHARD FLORIDA: It's a crisis
that's metastasizing
of poverty, concentrated
poverty, economic
distress in our suburbs.
PAUL SOLMAN: It's been happening
for decades,
of course: the inexorable
pinching of America's
middle class, the move towards
what's been
called an hourglass economy,
with the prosperous
in the top half, the less
well-off in the
bottom, and fewer and fewer
Americans in between.
RICHARD FLORIDA: If the old
urban crisis was
about the middle-class flight
from the city
to the suburbs, the new urban
crisis is about
really the disappearance of
middle-class neighborhoods
from our society.
PAUL SOLMAN: Yes.
RICHARD FLORIDA: What's tragic
about that
is, the middle-class
neighborhoods were really
our launch pads for upward
mobility and the
American dream.
PAUL SOLMAN: Thus Florida's
first epiphany:
the growing divide within cities
between the
rich and rest, who are being
forced out of
town, though he also had a
second insight,
the divide between cities,
winner-take-all
urbanism, the winners, San
Francisco, New
York, the losers, cities like
Detroit, Milwaukee,
Memphis.
And even in these stressed
cities, creative
class clustering is beginning to
segregate
the rich from the rest.
But wait a second.
The winning cities simply
followed Florida's
own advice, suggesting a pointed
question
about what he calls the new
urban crisis.
Did he help cause it?
RICHARD FLORIDA: I think I
really wanted to
help cities understand that
urban revival,
but that urban revival,
according to the data
we now have, it's 2000 to now
where that urban
revival goes into full-bore.
And I think I was not only
surprised, shocked
by the speed of it, and shocked
by the way
it put pressure on cities.
PAUL SOLMAN: But then what, if
anything, can
be done to close the gap?
Well, one answer, building
public transit
to connect the lagging outskirts
to jobs in
the booming urban core.
And, hey, the 34th Street and
Hudson Yards
subway station just opened in
2015.
RICHARD FLORIDA: It's
spectacular, but if
you look at most of the subway
stops and transit
hubs, Penn Station, they're
falling apart.
PAUL SOLMAN: Penn Station, New
York's key
commuter hub, is ever more
haunted by delays
and cancellations, the result of
aging infrastructure.
But if you really modernize a
city's transit
system, you run back into the
double-edged
sword of Florida's advice: The
better the
transit, the denser and more
productive the
city, the less its lower-end
workers will
be able to able to afford to
live in it, the
more of a rich enclave it
becomes.
Well, yes, that may be true,
Florida acknowledges,
and so he says that today's
cities have to
start insisting:
RICHARD FLORIDA: If you want to
build a tower
like that, if you want to get
the rights to
create height and density, we're
going to
make a trade.
And the trade we're going to
make, in order
for you to go up like that,
you're going to
make affordable housing.
PAUL SOLMAN: Affordable housing,
the only
real way to try to close the
gap, says Florida.
So, why not muscle developers to
offer workers
in their projects cheap rents,
good wages?
RICHARD FLORIDA: Why not have
your tenants
be the ones that are creating
better, higher-paying
service jobs, that are creating
a family-supporting
job, so we can have an
inclusionary prosperity,
and cities can say, we will
trade density
for good things that developers
will do?
In order to get the density they
want and
the height they want, they have
got to build
affordable housing, and they
have got to build
a more inclusive community.
PAUL SOLMAN: But, if they don't,
we're left
with the two faces of Florida's
prescient
creative class advice.
RICHARD FLORIDA: That's the
great contradiction
of today's urbanized capitalism.
You know, if we want to have a
productive
city, an innovative city, a
country that innovates
and creates good jobs, we need
them, but,
at the same time, that the very
thing that
is driving our economy forward
is creating
these divides.
PAUL SOLMAN: For the "PBS
NewsHour," this
is economics correspondent Paul
Solman, reporting
from and below the High Line in
New York City.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As we reported
earlier, Russian
President Vladimir Putin seemed
to hint today
at Russian involvement in
hacking during last
year's presidential campaign,
not by government
agents, but by what he called
patriotically-minded
individuals.
Meantime, the fallout from the
Trump campaign's
alleged contacts with Russia,
and the ongoing
tensions between Washington and
Moscow, continue
on several fronts.
John Yang has more.
JOHN YANG: Late last year, in
response to
the Russian campaign meddling,
the Obama administration
expelled 35 suspected Russian
intelligence
operatives from the United
States, and seized
two long-held Russian diplomatic
compounds,
one on the Eastern Shore of
Maryland, the
other on the North Shore of Long
Island.
Today, the Washington Post
reports that the
Trump White House is now
considering returning
those properties, which are
widely considered
intelligence-gathering hubs.
What's more, Politico reports
that alleged
Russian spies have been turning
up in odd
places around the United States,
often near
parts of the nation's critical
telecommunications
network.
It's one part of what U.S.
intelligence officials
see as intensifying Russian
espionage and
counterespionage measures both
here and in
Russia.
With me now for more on these
stories are
Karen DeYoung of The Washington
Post and Ali
Watkins of Politico.
Thanks to you both.
These two stories are different
enough, I
want to handle them one at a
time.
So, apologies to you, Ali.
I want the turn first to Karen
DeYoung.
Karen, walk us through how this
is coming
about.
The Obama administration took
away these compounds
to punish the Russians, and now
the Trump
White House is talking about
giving them back?
KAREN DEYOUNG, The Washington
Post: Well,
they were not -- although the
Russians charged
that they were expropriated,
they're still
the property of the Russian
government.
What the Americans did in the
Obama administration
was to ban the Russians from
having access
to them.
They told them they all had to
leave in 24
hours, and they couldn't come
back.
And then the FBI and other
agencies went in
and proved to their own
satisfaction that
what they thought was happening
there was
actually happening.
The Trump administration in a
meeting with
-- between Secretary Tillerson,
Secretary
of State Tillerson and the
Russian foreign
minister, Sergei Lavrov, last
month said that
they would drop what had been a
linkage between
the two, what the Trump
administration had
said was linkage between letting
the Russians
go back into the buildings and
have access
to them again and the Russians
giving up a
situation that had been going on
for several
years in St. Petersburg, where,
in response
to previous U.S. sanctions
against Russia
over Ukraine, the Russians had
refused to
allow the Americans to build a
new consulate
in St. Petersburg.
And so the administration had
said, well,
let's -- you give us our
consulate, and we
will give you back your
building.
The Russians said, no, you're in
the wrong
and we're not.
This was an illegal
expropriation.
And a couple days later, when
Foreign Minister
Lavrov was here, the Americans
said, OK, we
won't link them anymore.
And since then, the Americans
have been working
on specific proposals to give
the Russians
about the conditions under which
they will
give them back.
The Russians said today in
Moscow that -- that
Tillerson had told them that
they would send
them specific proposals, but
they haven't
gotten anything yet, but they're
still confident
that they're going to get their
compounds
back.
JOHN YANG: And, Ali, talking
about sort of
Russian activities, let's turn
to you.
Your reporting found that U.S.
intelligence
officials were finding Russian
diplomats turning
up in odd places around the
country, right?
ALI WATKINS, Politico: This has
been kind
of a growing concern of what my
understanding
is the FBI over the last
year-and-a-half of
Russian diplomats within the
U.S. who are
supposed to follow pretty
stringent travel
rules.
They're supposed to notify the
State Department
when they travel anywhere
outside of their
posting.
The Russian diplomats
effectively disregarding
those travel rules and turning
up in places
that they shouldn't have been or
that they
never told the State Department
they were
going.
JOHN YANG: And what do they
think they were
up to?
ALI WATKINS: Yes.
As U.S. intelligence officials
started kind
of looking at where these guys
were turning
up, they would turn up over
where a fiber-optics
cable ran underground, or these
strange locations
that when, taken as a whole, it
was -- became
clear that they were on some
kind of mission
to kind of map the
infrastructure.
The intel part went to this
infrastructure
mapping of some of the
telecommunications
networks in the country.
JOHN YANG: And was this -- is
this a change
from previous behavior?
Does it seem like the Russians
are emboldened
somehow?
ALI WATKINS: You know, there is
an element
of this that's kind of par for
the course.
There is natural intelligence
gathering.
The whole art of espionage is
trying to do
things that a host country
doesn't want you
to do.
But what's different about this
is that there's
been kind of a burgeoning
debate, particularly
over the last year with this
election operation,
of the U.S., particularly under
the Obama
administration, being unwilling
to fight back
on this, and not cracking down
as much as
they could, when they know that
these Russian
diplomats who are presumed
intelligence operatives
are doing these things, brazenly
disregarding
these rules that they're
supposed to follow.
JOHN YANG: Ali and Karen, let me
ask you both
-- and I will start with you,
Ali -- earlier
today, Vladimir Putin again
denied that the
Russian state was involved in
the meddling
with the election, but suggested
it could
be patriots in Russia.
What do you make of that
statement, Ali?
ALI WATKINS: I mean, there are
some very -- it's
a lot of kind of wordplay going
on there,
I think.
Putin is not stupid.
He knows what he's saying, in
that Russian
intelligence is fundamentally
different from
U.S. intelligence, in that there
are a lot
more gray zones in the world of
Russia.
And when Putin says this could
have been private
sector patriotic actors, but we
didn't know
anything about it on a state
level, from a
U.S. perspective, that might
make sense.
An American intelligence
operation isn't necessarily
set up to use private sector
hackers.
But Putin is kind of exploiting
that gray
zone and that disconnect.
So it's not surprising that he'd
say something
like that, but it no doubt comes
with a bit
of a wink-wink.
JOHN YANG: Karen, what do you
think of it?
You have been watching the
Russians for a
long time.
What do you take of that?
KAREN DEYOUNG: Well, I think
that the allegation
has always been that the
Russians worked through
individuals, non-governmental
individuals,
in order to do this hacking, and
that they
were guided by and turned the
information
over to Russian intelligence.
So, I think what Putin is doing
is basically
acknowledging that they did it
in a very indirect
way.
And he's kind of thumbing his
nose at the
Americans and saying, you know,
you can't
pin this on us, even though I
think that he's
not really fooling anybody.
JOHN YANG: Very good.
Karen DeYoung, Ali Watkins,
thanks for being
with us.
KAREN DEYOUNG: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We turn our focus
to politics
now, from tensions inside the
White House
to pulling out of the Paris
accord.
And we break it all down with
Matt Schlapp.
He is chair of the American
Conservative Union.
And Karine Jean-Pierre, a senior
adviser to
MoveOn.org.
And welcome back to both of you.
So, let's be crassly political
here.
We talked earlier, Matt, in the
program about
the substance of the president's
decision.
MATT SCHLAPP, Former White House
Director
of Political Affairs: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the pushback
on it.
What was the political calculus
behind this,
do you think?
MATT SCHLAPP: You look at all
these polls.
Most polls will tell you that
Americans supported
the idea of fighting climate
change.
But that's really not right the
question.
It's digging down deeper.
The real question about climate
change is,
are they willing to pay more to
fill their
tank with gas?
Are they willing to pay more for
their utility
bills?
Are they willing to take some of
this American
energy -- we're now the world's
leading supplier
of energy -- and take it
offline, which has
a big impact on U.S. jobs?
That's the real question.
By the way, it cuts across party
lines.
Most Americans think that what
they're asking
them to pay for, for this
crusade on climate
is simply not worth losing jobs
or paying
more for energy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It makes it sound
like a winning
decision today, Karine.
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE, Democratic
Strategist:
I think what happened today,
what we saw today,
what Donald Trump did was -- it
was a political
play.
That's all it was.
It wasn't about the economy.
It wasn't about the environment.
It wasn't about businesses.
It was purely about that small,
shrinking
base that he has that he needs
to placate
with -- when it comes to every
tweet, every
action, every message that he
puts out, it's
all about them.
He continues to give them the
red meat that
he feels that they need, and
that's what we
saw.
And, if anything, we really saw
Steve Bannon
winning the day with that speech
as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, is there
any risk, political
risk, in what the president did,
Matt?
MATT SCHLAPP: Sure.
Sure.
I think, if it is about
politics, people will
see through that.
I actually think it's something
deeper.
It's a campaign promise he made
to the working
men and women across this
country who have
not seen their economic
prospects improve.
You see that in poll after poll.
I think it's the number one
reason Donald
Trump is president, and that his
number one
gauge of his success is if the
economy can
get chugging and we can make
these folks feel
and actually know that their
economic prospects
are improving.
If he can't do that, I think
he's going to
have political trouble.
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: Can I just
add, Judy,
there is a poll -- speaking of a
poll, there's
a poll that shows 70 percent of
Americans
actually agreed with the Paris
accord; 55
percent were Republicans.
So, there were Americans who
were behind,
behind this.
MATT SCHLAPP: But if you dig
deeper, the real
political question is, are you
willing to
pay the higher taxes, the
credits and all
the things that you have to do
to make carbon
more expensive to take it off
the grid?
And that's where it gets dicey
for your side.
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: Well, I
think the bigger
question is our planet and what
are we going
to leave our children with --
you have five
kids, I have a kid -- and our
grandchildren
with, if we don't take actually
responsibility
to what this country, our
country is doing
to the climate?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let's also talk
about what
has been happening inside the
White House
now.
A lot of suspense built up today
over what
the president was going to this,
at a time
when there's been a lot of
reporting about
unsettled -- the unsettled
nature of how things
are going now with the staff.
MATT SCHLAPP: I haven't read any
of that.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it's been
in a couple
of news organizations.
Let me put it that way.
You talk to people in the White
House.
MATT SCHLAPP: Sure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is that
overblown?
MATT SCHLAPP: No.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Are people
feeling -- OK, what
is going on?
MATT SCHLAPP: No, it's not
overblown.
And my belief is that the
president is impatient
over the fact that there's been
some bungling
on some of these rollouts and
some of these
decisions.
There's been way too much
leaking.
There is always leaking in White
Houses, but
this is a journalist's dream
come true, because
you have 18, 20, 22 people
talking for stories.
It's out of control.
And I think he knows it needs to
tighten up.
And I believe that he's
communicated internally
that he expects it to tighten
up.
And if it doesn't get better --
and he has
got to up his game, too.
If it doesn't get better, I
think he's going
to make a lot more changes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Karine, what
is -- I mean,
is this just all an upside for
Democrats,
if the president continues to
have these kinds
of issues, or are Democrats
basically just
watching from the sideline?
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: I think we
just watch
on the sideline.
I think he's his worst enemy.
I mean, look, when it comes to
situations
like this -- and you know.
You have worked for a president.
I have worked for the president.
The fish really rots at its
head.
This is Donald Trump's
responsibility.
There is no one else to blame
but himself.
He's the one that tweets
off-message, not
his staff.
He's the one that says things
that doesn't
make sense that really angers a
lot of people,
including, you know, people who
even voted
for him are a little concerned
about what
he's doing.
And we see that in focus groups.
JUDY WOODRUFF: When you say he
needs to up
his game, your words, what did
you mean?
MATT SCHLAPP: Yes.
Well, look, there's an
independent counsel.
There's an investigation going
on.
He's got to be careful about how
he talks
about that.
My advice is for the White House
is simply
go along with the investigation.
Do not comment on the
investigation.
Don't do anything that makes it
look like
you're putting any pressure on
the investigation.
I understand the president and
his team are
frustrated because they don't
see any there
there.
But I think they need to do
that.
I think, as far as the staff is
concerned,
I think it was absurd that the
Russian delegation
was able to go into the Oval
Office with recording
devices and cameras.
They didn't know who was going
to get the
photos.
The Keystone Cops part of this
must end.
With an outsider president and
an investigation
going on, the staff has to be
twice as good,
and they can't afford to make
these kind of
mistakes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Karine, no
matter what
is going on in the White House,
if Donald
Trump's base, the people who
voted for him,
like the basics of what he's
doing, whether
it's the climate decision or, I
don't know,
his attempts to set up a travel
ban, even
though that hasn't happened yet,
does it really
matter politically whether the
White House
is -- quote -- "dysfunctional"
or not?
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: I think it
will at some
point.
I mean, there's 2018 coming
right around the
corner.
And that's going to hurt
Republicans, what
we see Donald Trump doing,
because it's not
just Republicans.
It's not that small base that
got him to the
White House.
It was also Democrats and
independents that
got him into the White House.
MATT SCHLAPP: That's true.
(CROSSTALK)
MATT SCHLAPP: And, by the way,
he has a lot
of them on his staff at the
White House, too.
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: Right.
But here's the thing.
If you look at the House in some
of these
suburbs that they have to win,
the Republicans
have to win, you need support
outside of your
Republican base.
So, it is going to hurt them
when it comes
to 2018.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I have a feeling
this may not
be the last time we have a
chance to talk
about this.
(LAUGHTER)
MATT SCHLAPP: Let's hope not.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Karine
Jean-Pierre, Matt Schlapp,
thank you both.
MATT SCHLAPP: Thank you.
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: Thanks,
Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now to another in
our Brief
But Spectacular series, where we
ask people
to describe their passions.
Five-and-a-half million
Americans are living
with Alzheimer's disease, and
another 15 million
serve as their unpaid
caregivers.
Tonight, two individuals
diagnosed with Alzheimer's,
Chris Hannafan and Pam Montana,
share their
experiences.
CHRIS HANNAFAN, Living With
Alzheimer's: I
am 66.
I was diagnosed when I was 65.
PAM MONTANA, Living With
Alzheimer's: I was
diagnosed initially in November
of 2015.
And I think I'm getting the
dates right.
Part of my issue is my dates
sometimes mush
together.
CHRIS HANNAFAN: Yes, I know
exactly what we're
doing.
I know you're Steve.
I know you're Zack.
We're here in Pine Street,
finally.
(LAUGHTER)
PAM MONTANA: On July 20 of last
year, I received
the official diagnosis, with 17
research physicians
and doctors in the room, myself,
my husband
and my two children, with the
diagnosis of
early-onset, early-stage
Alzheimer's.
QUESTION: You can take a minute
or two.
PAM MONTANA: Every time I say
it.
CHRIS HANNAFAN: The way I
explain it to people
is, I am in a new life.
My former life no longer exists,
and it's
up to me to create a new life.
PAM MONTANA: I knew something
was wrong.
It's not normal to not be able
to calculate
a tip anymore.
It's not normal to not do math
in your head
and to be able to subtract or
add numbers.
It's not normal to not remember
conversations
or to attend a training class
and not remember
what was taught.
CHRIS HANNAFAN: More and more
words are going
away.
And there are a number of words
that, no matter
how I remember them, they are
not there.
I could say, OK, now I have got
it, and, two
minutes later, I won't have it.
PAM MONTANA: With Alzheimer's,
you don't have
an option.
You just -- it's just not there.
The information is just gone.
CHRIS HANNAFAN: It seems to be
particularly
difficult for those of us with
Alzheimer's
early-onset to have -- sorry --
I got a little
bit.
OK, where was I?
PAM MONTANA: Frustrating is the
word that
comes to mind.
I am frustrated with the fact
that I don't
know what 32 minus seven is
without a pen
and paper.
It frustrates me that I have no
idea what
today is, but I do know it's
Friday.
CHRIS HANNAFAN: The first thing
I lost was
my car.
So, I was no longer able to use
my car for
various reasons.
I got a bicycle.
And I have had two crashes with
that.
And I think part of that is
spatial.
PAM MONTANA: Now I have a new
job.
And that job is to be loud and
proud about
my disease, to share my symptoms
with everyone
and anyone who will listen to
me.
CHRIS HANNAFAN: I'm able to be
useful.
I'm able to have -- to surround
myself with
a lot of people, which is
absolutely the most
important thing you can do with
Alzheimer's.
PAM MONTANA: Everyone always
tells me I look
good.
Well, what does that have to do
with anything?
I keep saying to people, I'm
going to walk
around in a bathrobe with a
towel on my head,
you know, no makeup, just an old
hag, and
then maybe then they will think
I have Alzheimer's.
But this is what Alzheimer's
looks like.
It looks like me.
CHRIS HANNAFAN: My name is Chris
Hannafan.
PAM MONTANA: My name is Pam
Montana.
And this is my Brief But
Spectacular take...
CHRIS HANNAFAN: Brief But
Spectacular take.
PAM MONTANA: ... on living with
Alzheimer's.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you, Chris
and Pam, for
sharing with all of us what
you're going through.
Wow.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening with Mark Shields and
David Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and we will see you soon.